This time distinguishes between the night that came before it and the beginning of the Halachic day, in a similar manner to the time period between Sunset (שקיעה) and Nightfall (צאת הכוכבים), labeled as Ben Hashmashoth (בן השמשות). While night-dependent commandments/מצות could no longer be done by this point (like Arvit), neither can day-bound commandments be done optimally.

When there is a Sha'at Hadachak (in a time of need) situation, mitzvot that are dependent on the daytime could be done starting now. Similarly, if any mitzvah was performed during this time, they are exempt bediavad (after the fact) even if not during a Sha'at Hadachak situation.

To calculate this, one would need to offset the time of sunrise by -72 minutes. These minutes are calculated by taking the time between sunrise and sunset, dividing that into 12 to determine a seasonal hour and then proceeding to divide that into 60 to determine a seasonal minute. (Source: Rambam Pe’er HaDor 44, Halichot Olam vol. 1 page 106 & pages 248-250).
- The Ohr Hachaim calendar uses elevation-adjusted sunrise and sunset times by default, toggleable via settings.
- The Amudeh Hora'ah calendar does this calculation on an equinox day, where the time difference between sunrise and sunset are approximately 12 hours apart. This is then adjusted to locations with a higher/lower longitude value from Israel via the usage of the scientific result of 16.1 degrees (which comes out to 16.04)

As a sidepoint, Alot HaShachar (עלות השחר) gets its name from the verse in Genesis 32:25. In the Talmud, it goes by the title of Amud Hashachar (עמוד השחר).