Sunrise ("Hanetz") is the official beginning of the new Halachic day, where one can now perform any day-dependent Mitzvot (Shofar, Lulav, Megillah) in an optimal fashion. The time period itself is also the proper time to be saying the Tefilah of Shacharit, based on the verse (Tehilim 72:5) "יִֽירָא֥וּךָ עִם־שָׁ֣מֶשׁ"; "They will fear you with the sun". Many take extra precision to ensure they start by the sunrise minute, although Maran zt"l himself wasn't as time-precise (see Orchot Maran I 7:5).

---

The astronomical way to determine this time is by seeing when the uppermost edge of the solar sphere is visible in the east [Halacha Berurah (intro to siman 261, halacha 21) & Yalkut Yosef (new edition, siman 89 page 460)]. This astronomical times is approximately six minutes prior to a full solar reveal [Rambam on Hilchot Kriat Shema (1:11), based on the כסף משנה's גרסה, Rav Pa'alim Vol. II, Orach Hayim, Chapter 3].
- Our calculations are based on the exact latitude and longitude given, as brought down by the דברי יוסף (61a). However, most authorities hold that the place that sees the sun the earliest is used to calculate sunrise for the whole city.
- <p>The definition of "visibility" according to the level of the law only requires it to be visible based on a lack of horizontal obstructions (meaning sea-level sunrise). This is as reported by the NOAA algorithm (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration), which is what we use by default.</p><p>However, the traditional definition has been "when the sun starts shinning on the hilltops" (תלמדי רבינו יונה על ברכות ד: בדפי הריף). As such, regardless of whether the reported time will be more lenient or stringent, it is recommended to use those times instead for starting the day (Mishnah Berurah 588:2 based on Rashi & Ran on Megillah 20; Eshel Avraham Botchach, Orach Hayim 89; Yalkut Yosef, new edition, siman 89 page 51). We provide a "Visual Sunrise setup" for users willing to walk through the process, using the times generated via the ChaiTables website (Rabbi Chaim Keller) through its internal geographical map (which they call a DTM).</p>

<button class="btn btn-primary" data-bs-toggle="modal" data-bs-target="#ctModal">Setup Visible Sunrise</button>