Pelag Ha'Minḥa is defined as the latter half of the time span between מנחה קטנה until the end of the day (ערב), occurring at 10¾ hours into the day (Berakhot Bavli 26b). Since מנחה קטנה begins at 9½ hours into the day, this leaves only 1¼ seasonal hours from the start of this half until the end of the מנחה. It is during this time that one may start performing a select few commandments of the night, such as accepting Shabbat early (Shulḥan Arukh O"Ḥ, 273:4), lighting Ḥanukah candles early (footnotes of Ḥazon Ovadia Ḥanukah pg. 89) or praying תפילת ערבית when one (preferably) already prayed Minḥa (Berakhoth 26a, Rabbi Yehuda).

---

The Gemara's central inquiry concerns whether the "half" is measured from מנחה גדולה or מנחה קטנה; once the _beraita_ clarifies it is the latter, the Gemara proceeds to calculate the day's span assuming a 12-hour daytime period, and פלג המנחה happening within those 12-hours. It identifies that מנחה קטנה is the 9½'th hour of the day, then leaving this "half" (פלג המנחה) to start at "11 minus a quarter hours". This implies that the two halves of מנחה קטנה are equal, placing ערב at the 12th hour—after both halves have elapsed. However, the Gemara does not explicitly define ערב, leaving it to the Rishonim to associate it either with sunset or nightfall.

The calculation of seasonal hours from sunrise to sunset aligns with the sacrificial schedule, particularly the כבש של בין הערבים (afternoon lamb offering), which parallels the מנחה prayer. This is per the proof of Rabbenu Ḥananel (citing R' Yehuda's parallel's between the rules of the שתי תמידים and when one can pray the two daytime prayers). Thus, פלג המנחה is placed 1¼ seasonal hours before sunset (as held by Talmideh Rabbenu Yonah, Berakhoth Bavli 26a; Rambam, Laws of Prayer, 3:4; Shilteh Hagiborim on the Mordekhi; R' Yitzḥak Yisraeli's explanation of the Meiri - Yoseh Binah pg. 105).

However, the definition of a day is explicitly defined as starting from Dawn and ending by Nightfall (Pesaḥim Bavli 94a), thus defining ערב (being the end-time of מנחה) as Nightfall. Within that Talmudic context, the seasonal hours would also retain that length and Nightfall would be 72 minutes long, proportionate to the 72 minutes used to start the day (as ruled by Rabbenu Tam). With both rules implemented (as ruled by the Terumat Ha'Deshen; see siman 1), the halachic midday corresponds with the sun's midpoint in its traversal (as explicitly outlined by Shu"t Divreh Yosef Shwartz pg. 58 & R' Tukachinsky in the Sefer "Ben Hashmashot", pg. 98). Nevertheless, Pelag Ha'Minḥa is independent from proportionality (as discussed in Pri Ḥadash, Kuntress Debei Shimsha, end of ספר מים חיים), hence allowing either one of those rules to be broken. This opened the door for two preceeding interpretations:

- By ignoring the extended length of a seasonal hour but still keeping a proportionate Nightfall (thus being 72 minutes in both directions), the S"A & Ramban (in addition to Ra'ah, Berakhoth 26b; Ritva, Berakhoth 27b; Rabbi Yaakov Emden, Prozdor Bayit 41, paragraph 28 explicitly linking this to Shabbat's Candle Lighting) created a time for פלג המנחה that was close enough to sunset to make both terms used interchangably (see the Ramban, Pesaḥim 54b; as for the S"A, see O"Ḥ 233 for Nightfall being the endtime of מנחה as well as O"Ḥ 261 describing what Nightfall is, and the connection between sunset for Tosefet Shabbat to פלג המנחה, as the Rama implicitly outlines).
- Contemporary authorities, however, used the extended seasonal length but measured using the _Geonic_ Nightfall, thus creating a midday that's no longer defined by the midpoint of the sun's traversal (see the Ben Ish Ḥai, Year I, Vayakhel VIII; see also Ohr Letzion vol. 2 pg. 147 & the responsas of the Ma'amar Mordechai vol. 4 siman 12).

This is all a build up to the opinions of Yabi'a Omer (vol. 2 siman 21 num. 15) and his two sons - R' Avraham Yosef in his [Parashat Terumah 5779 shiur min 3:55](https://torahanytime.com/lectures/76371) as well as R Yitzḥak Yosef in multiple shiurim ([Motzei Shabbat Pesach 5779 shiur min 37](https://torahanytime.com/lectures/81670), [Motzei Shabbat Bo 5778 shiur min 25](https://torahanytime.com/lectures/55391)) & his Yalkut Yosef (new edition, siman 271, pages 139 & 144-147) - to use the Geonic Nightfall as an offset for Pelag, in both stringencies (such as by blessings in vain regarding ערבית and הדלקת נרות), but _also in its leniencies_ (such as the last time to eat _Seudat Shelishit_ on Erev Pesaḥ - see Ḥ"'O Pesaḥ pg. 67 & pg. 199). This is also reflected in later writings of Maran zt'l himself (Ḥazon 'Ovadia Ta'anit pg. 94; Halikhot 'Olam vol. 1 pg. 223), even if he's not made mention of it by earlier sections of how seasonal hours work (Halikhot Olam, vol. 1 pg. 248). The questions on this position do not come from its specifications in the books, since the Sefarim were vague in terms of a resulting time; rather, the questions come from the implementation in the Ohr Hachaim calendar, which fills in blanks that the sefarim did not specify (often times from the direction of Hakham Ovadia himself). In that calendar, they ignore _both_ the proportionality of the day when defining Nightfall _and_ the use of those extended seasonal minutes. Furthermore, this calculation is _isolated_ to פלג המנחה; other zemanim in the calendar are all consistent with the time range from sunrise to sunset. Nevertheless, we've used the implementation of the Ohr Hachaim calendar when representing the "Yalkut Yosef" opinion, due to its authoritative status in representing the calculations from the sefarim.

In contrast, R' David Yosef (אוצרות יוסף תשובה ז בסוף הלכה ברורה חלק י"ד) advocates restoring פלג המנחה's definition as 1¼ seasonal hours before sunset, as per the original Sepharadic tradition. In addition to the questions araised on the Yabi'a Omer's position above, there is no concern about going against the stricter ruling for blessings, since precedents in a blessing override concerns about them (כמו שכתב במנחת כהן, מעמר ב, בסוף פרק ט. This is also applicable for the latest time to pray שחרית, where we are not concerned for the MG"A seasonal hour calculation). However, the Halacha Berura also allows praying מנחה after sunset; although this would be fine if it was reserved as a בדיעבד ruling, the Halacha Berura relies on this time enough that one should prefer this time for minyan instead of praying alone before sunset, even though he wouldn't use it as a reliability for the calculation of פלג המנחה.

When it comes to deciding which time to use, neither brother are willing to compromise (irrespective of Halacha Berurah Siman 233 pg. 75 saying the Yalkut Yosef opinion), and thus we've decided to present both opinions with equal weight. As a suggestion for a compromise, it is possible to be stringent for the Halacha Berura by praying מנחה before his time of פלג המנחה and stringent for the Yalkut Yosef's פלג המנחה regarding Biblical matters (such as קידוש בליל שבת or הבדלה מוקדם ביום שבת). There are opinions that would argue that ערבית, what they assert as the first prayer of "the day", would fulfill the Biblical obligation to prayer and thus be subject to the same recommendation. Nevertheless, the Kaf Ha'Ḥayyim (O"Ḥ 233:7) asserts that we are lenient regarding prayer to use the time represented in our calendar as the Halacha Berura time (which we can thus extend to anything needing a blessing - the "stringency" of this ruling - based the position of the מנחת כהן), and there are others who assume שחרית is the obligatory prayer anyway (ראה בפרי מגדים סי' ד' מש"ז ס"ק טס). Our recommendation above is based on the Halikhot Olam (vol. 1 pg. 248) who attributed Biblical matters to the extended seasonal hours (similar to the ruling by קריאת שמע and any time for חמץ בערב פסח, although we are lenient to not be as proportional here because being proportional to the extended hour's proportionate time would result in a strict enough standard that the leniency of פלג המנחה would be moot by just waiting anyway until sunset).

---

Fun fact: Under Biblical Hebrew rules of "קטל", the proper pronounciation of פלג המנחה should transliterate to "Peleg Ha'Minḥa". Nevertheless, we've kept it "Pelag" to adhear to Hakham Ovadia's pronounciation style.