From the letter of the law, all Halachic times are determined relative to the day’s length, measured from sunrise to sunset.

Some of the stringencies (usually for Biblical matters, such as both the daytime and nighttime Shem’a) call for an extension of the day’s definition. This extension, however, exceeds the sunrise to sunset barrier, as it adds 72 minutes to both directions (reflective of the Halachic times of Dawn and the Nightfall of Rabbenu Tam). To accurately calculate these extended times, one must account for the astronomical context of the observer’s location - specifically, the speed rate of the solar movement below the horizon, decreasing with the distance from the equator. The standardized method involves determining the sun’s position—expressed in degrees—at the relevant Halachic moment on the day of the equinox in Israel. This angular position is then used to calculate the time it would take for the sun to reach the same position at the observer’s location. The resulting duration becomes the recalibrated value for the seasonal minutes, proportionally adjusted to the local length of day. The logic for re-measuring the number of seasonal minutes is also used for other times outside the day’s range, even independent of a seasonal hour’s length (such as the 13.5 seasonal minute Nightfall).

This explanation document is written using Talmudic language; by default, numbers given will reflect the practical ruling in Israel, without specifying any equivalent adjustments needed to compensate for the equator distance (see the table below for the equivalent measurements). Furthermore, each usage of any time unit (“minutes” or “hours”) will only be seasonal, from sunrise to sunset – stringencies that redefine these terms (such as “MG’A seasonal hours”, the 30-fixed minute stringency for Minḥa Gedola or the use of degrees for concluding Shabbat/Yom Tov) will be explicit.