Welcome to the Rabbi Ovadiah Yosef Calendar Website, this website was made to help you find out the most accurate zmanim of the day according to Rabbi Ovadiah Yosef ZT"L for your own city! The explanation of how each zman is calculated can be found later on in this page.

However, I would like to let anyone reading this to know that this website is 100% according to the opinion of Rabbi Ovadiah Yosef ZT"L and uses the KosherJava/KosherZmanim API to do all the calculations. I have tried my best to make this website as accurate as possible, and to make the website as easy to use as possible.

There are some opinions that say that the zmanim of Rabbi Ovadiah Yosef ZT"L that are calculated by the Ohr Hachaim calendar are only accurate for Israel, and that for the rest of the world, the zmanim are supposed to be calculated by the degrees of the sun like the Ashkenazim (their reason being because that is more accurate according to nature). Some opinions even go as far as to say that we should only use the degree calculations that the Ashkenazim use to find out the length of a shaah zmanit. However, I have personally spoken with Rabbi David Yosef Shlita (January/17/2023, while he was in NY), and he has told me personally that these opinions are incorrect. Therefore, the correct way to calculate the zmanim of Rabbi Ovadiah Yosef ZT"L is like how the Ohr Hachaim calendar does it in Israel (which is the same way that this website does it) FOR EVERYWHERE IN THE WORLD.

### Basic things to know about the website.
1. The website automatically gets your current elevation in meters based on the latitude and longitude of your city. If you want to change this,  you can do so by manually entering your location or by changing the elevation directly in the Local Storage. You can also press the "Do not use elevation" button to remove elevation from the calculations. "Visible sunrise tables from Chaitables.com have not been implemented yet, but will be in the future".
2. There are a few different minhagim to choose from in the settings part of the website. Make sure to choose the correct ones for your city/kehila. For example, the default candle lighting time is set to 20 minutes before sunset, and the default end time for shabbat is set to 40 minutes after sunset. Please change these settings to your own customs by going to the settings page or by clicking on the numbers between the parentheses.
3. Lastly, the zmanim can be included with seconds, DO NOT RELY ON THESE SECONDS. The only zman that can be relied on to the second is the visible sunrise time from chaitables.com. Otherwise, these zmanim are NOT accurate to the second! You should always round up or down a minute or two just in case.

For more information, including how the Zmanim are checked, please visit our [GitHub Repository for our Android app](https://github.com/Elyahu41/RabbiOvadiahYosefCalendarApp) as well as our calendar page.