The Halachic start of the day is Dawn, when the sun's rays can be seen in the lit-up Eastern part of the sky (Rosh, Brachot 4:1; Rambam Pirush Mishnayoth Yoma 3:1; Shulḥan Arukh O.Ḥ. 89:1). In Hebrew, this time is either called עלות השחר (as used in Genesis 32:25; Variant of וכמו השחר עלה is used in Genesis 19:15) or <span style="unicode-bidi: isolate;">עמוד השחר</span> (משנה ברכות א:א). Practically, the new day's obligations start from this time (such as not eating before prayer; S"A O"Ḥ 89:5), even though active-commands should be delayed until sunrise when one is not in an pressing circumstance (although one who erroniously did it before sunrise is exempt post-facto). This also means that the night's commandments are no longer performable, such as Tiqqun Ḥaṣoth, Qeriath Shema (when not obmitted due to negligence) and the evening prayer.

---

The Talmud (פסחים בבלי צד) asserts that the time this astronomical sighting (the lessening of the firmanent's thickness) occurs can be measured backwards from sunrise in the time-equivalent measurement of a *mil*. A *mil* is the distance of 2000 *Amot* (math derived from S"A O"Ḥ 261:2), and we measure this space in a time format by determining how long it would take the average person to walk this distance. However, we only use this fixed measurement on an equinox day; on other days, how long a *mil* is can be determined by the length of the day (as explained by מנחת כהן (מבוא השמש מאמר ב פרק ג) על שו"ת פאר הדור 44. זה פסק של מרן עובדיה, והביא ראיה מבא"ח (שנא ראשונה - וארא ה, ויקהל ד, צב ח; שנא שניא - נח ז; רב פעלים ב:ב), וכן הסקים הילקוט יוסף (נ"ח:ג)). Our custom is to equate each mil as **eighteen minutes** (S"A O"Ḥ 459:2), and since we hold by Rabbi Yehuda that there is 4 mil between dawn to sunrise, Dawn would happen **72 seasonal minutes** before sunrise.

One last factor that could affect the calculation is R' David Yosef's opinion (as represented in Halacha Berurah, intro to siman 261 halacha 13) of latitudinal deviation (from the Minchat Cohen (2 4), Pri Ḥadash (Kuntres DeBey Shimshey 8) & Bet David 104), where the base time of 72 minutes changes depending on how far one is from the equator in respect to Israel. This is done to factor the astronomical reality, where the duration of twilight expands/shrinks depending on its distance to the equator (meaning it could even be shorter than Israel's time). As such, rather than focusing on the codified time of 72 minutes, we would determine where the sun is positioned relative to the earth on the equinox day in Israel (scientifically referred to as "degrees below the horizon"). We would then apply that position/degree to the respective location on the equinox day, measure the resulting minutes before sunrise and make _those_ minutes seasonal. Since this position is subject to a dispute between R' David Yosef & R' Yitzḥak Yosef (Ein Yitzḥak), we made this deviation accommodation in a mode labeled "Amudeh Hora'ah" mode. Those looking to maintain the status quo of standard seasonal minutes should switch to the "Ohr Hachaim" mode.